maa
(ouR Pasts-1

 

The story of Hatappa

Very often, old buildings have a story to tell. Nearly
a hundred and fifty years ago, when railway lines
were being laid down for the first time in the
Punjab, engineers stumbled upon the site of
Harappa im present-day Pakistan. To them, it
seemed like a mound that was a rich source of
ready made, high quality bricks. So they carried
off thousands of bricks from the walls of the old
buildings of the city to build railway lines. Many
buildings were completely destroyed.

Then, about eighty years ago, archaeologists
found the site, and realised that this was one of
the oldest cities in the subcontinent. As this was
the first city to be discovered, all other sites from
where similar buildings (and other things) were
found were described as Harappan. These cities
developed about 4700 years ago.

Very often, old buildings are pulled down to
make way for new construction. Do you think it
is important to preserve old buildings?

m2021What was special about these cities? ‘These cities were found in
the Punjab and Sind in

Many of these cities were divided into two or more Pakistan, and in Gujarat,
parts, Usually, the part to the west was smaller fesshon Horyanaane
but higher. Archaeologists describe this as the x .prcologues nave found
citadel Generally, the part to the east was larger 4st of unque object in
but lower. This is called the lower town. Very often amos all these cites red
walls of baked brick were built around each part. 27 Ae)"
‘The bricks were so well baked that they have eins seis specs!
lasted for thousands of years. The bricks were beads. copper tool. and
laid in an interlocking pattern and that made the _peralled sided ong stone
walls strong.

In some cities, special
buildings were constructed A
on the citadel. For example,
in Mohenjodaro, a very MAR: 3
special tank, — which Bie ries cig
archaeologists call the Great eee
Bath, was built in this area.
This was lined with bricks,
coated with plaster, and
made water-tight with a layer
of natural tar. There were
steps leading down to it from
two sides, while there were
rooms on all sides. Water was
probably brought in from a
well, and drained-out after
use. Perhaps important
people took a dip in this tank
on special occasions. ARABIAN SEA

Other cities, such as
Kalibangan and Lothal had
fire altars, where sacrifices
may have been performed.
And some cities like
Mohenjodaro, Harappa, and
Lothal had elaborate store | sseronslap
houses. Notte Sole‘The Great Bath

How bricks were
arranged to build walls
in Harappan cities

 

 

Houses, drains and, streets

Generally, houses were either one or two storeys
high, with rooms built around a courtyard. Most
houses had a. separate bathing area, and some
had wells to supply water.

Many of these cities had covered drains. Notice
how carefully these were laid out,
in straight lines. Although you
cannot see it, each drain had a
gentle slope so that water could flow
through it. Very often, drains in
houses were connected to those on
the streets and smaller drains led
into bigger ones. As the drains were
covered, inspection holes were
provided at intervals to clean them.
All three — houses, drains and
streets — were probably planned
and built at the same time.

List at least two differences
between the houses described here
and those that you studied about
in Chapter 2.Life in the city

‘A Harappan city was a very busy place.
There were people who planned the
construction of special buildings in the city.
‘These were probably the rulers. It is likely
that the rulers sent people to distant lands.
to get metal, precious stones, and other
things that they wanted. They may have
kept the most valuable objects, such as
ornaments of gold and silver, or beautiful
beads, for themselves. And there were
scribes, people who knew how to write, who
helped prepare the seals, and perhaps
wrote on other materials that have not
survived,

Besides, there were men and women,
crafts persons, making all kinds of things
— either in their own homes, or in special
workshops. People were travelling to
distant lands or returning with raw
materials and, perhaps, stories, Many
terracotta toys have been found and

   

children must have played with these. Top : A street in
Make a list of the people who lived in the city, _Moheniedaro wih
Were any of these people listed as living in
villages such as Mehrgarh?

drain,
Above : A well

Far Left : A Harappan
seal The signs on the top
of the seal are part of a
script. This s the earliest
form of writing known in
the subcontinent
Scholars have tried to
read these signs but we
stil do not know exactly
what they mean.

Left: Terracotta toys

278Top : Stone weights
Notice how carefully and
precisely these weights
fre shaped, These were
made of chert, a kind of
stone, These were
probably used to weigh
precious stones or
metals

Right : Beads

Many of these were
made out of carnelian, &
beautiful red stone. The
stone was cut, shaped,
polished and finally @
hole was bored through
the centre $0 that a
string could be passed
‘hough it

Far right : Stone blades,
Bottom Right
Embroidered cloth

A stone statue of an
Important man found
from Mohenjodaro
shows him wearing an
embroidered garment.

=28

New crafts in the city

Let us look at some of the objects that were made
and found in Harappan cities. Most of the things
that have been found by archaeologists are made
ofstone, shell and metal, including copper, bronze,
gold and silver. Copper and bronze were used to
make tools, weapons, ornaments and vessels.
Gold and silver were used to make ornaments
and vessels.

Perhaps the most striking finds are those of
beads, weights, and blades.

 

 

‘The Harappans also made seals out of stone.
‘These are generally rectangular (See illustration
on page 27) and usually have an animal carved
on them,

‘The Harappans also made pots with beautiful

black designs, such as the one
shown on page 6.

Was metal used in the villages
you learnt about in Chapter 2?

Was stone used to make
weights?

Cotton was probably grown
at Mehrgarh from about 7000
years ago. Actual pieces of
cloth were found attached
to the lid of a silver vase and
some copper objects at
Mohenjodaro. Archaeologists
have also found spindle whorls,

  
 
     
        
 

IN

rumade of terracotta and faience. These were used

to spin thread.

Many of the things that were produced were
probably the work of specialists. A specialist is a
person who is trained to do only one kind of work.
for example, cutting stone, or polishing beads, or
carving seals. Look at the illustration (page 28)
and see how well the face is carved and how
carefully the beard is shown. This must have been
the work of an expert crafts person.

Not everybody could have beena specialist. We
do not know whether only men were specialists
or only women were specialists. Perhaps some
women and men may have been specialists.

In search of raw materials

Raw materials are substances that are either
found naturally (such as wood, or ores of metals)
or produced by farmers or herders. These are then
processed to produce finished goods. For example,
cotton, produced by farmers, is a raw material
that may be processed to make cloth. While some
of the raw materials that the Harappans used were
available locally, many items such as copper. tin,
gold, silver and precious stones had to be brought
from distant places.

The Harappans probably got copper from
present-day Rajasthan, and even from Oman in

m2021

2

cmsHow were goods carried
from one place to
another?

Look at the illustrations
(One shows a toy and the
other isa sel

(Can you suggest what
the modes of transport
used by the Harappane
were? Did you come
across illustrations of
wheeled vehicles in
‘earlier lessons?

A toy plough
Today, in mary farming
communities, only men
tse the plough. We do
not know whether the
Harappans followed

such customs oF not.

= 30

West Asia. Tin, which was mixed with
copper to produce bronze, may have been
brought from present-day Afghanistan
and Iran, Gold could have come all the
way from present-day Karnataka, and
precious stones from present-day
Gujarat, Iran and Afghanistan.

 

Food for people in, the cities

While many people lived in the cities, others living
in the countryside grew crops and reared animals.
These farmers and herders supplied food to crafts
persons, scribes and rulers in the cities. We know
from remains of plants that the Harappans grew
wheat, barley, pulses, peas, rice, sesame, linseed
and mustard.

‘A new-tool, the plough, was used to dig the
earth for turning the soil and planting seeds. While
real ploughs, which were probably made of wood,
have not survived, toy models have been found.
As this region does not receive heavy rainfall, some
form of irrigation may have been used. This means
that water was stored and
supplied to the fields when the
plants were growing
The Harappans reared cattle, sheep,
goat and buffalo. Water and pastures were
available around settlements. However, in the dry
summer months large herds of animals were
probably taken to greater distances in search of
grass and water. They also collected fruits likeber, caught fish and hunted wild animals like the
antelope.

A closer look — Harappan towns in Gujarat

The city of Dholavira was located on Khadir Beyt
{also spelled as Bet) in the Rann of Kutch, where
there was fresh water and fertile soil. Unlike some
of the other Harappan cities, which were divided
into two parts, Dholavira was divided into three
parts, and each part was surrounded with massive
stone walls, with entrances through gateways.
‘There was also a large open area in the settlement,
where public ceremonies could be held. Other
finds include large letters of the Harappan script
that were carved out of white stone and perhaps
inlaid in wood. This is a unique find as generally
Harappan writing has been found on-small
objects such as seals.

The city of Lothal stood beside a fributary of
the Sabarmati, in Gujarat, close (o the Guif of
Khambat. It was situated near areas where raw
materials such as semi-precious stones were
easily available. This was an important centre for
making objects out of stone, shell and metal
There was also a store house in the city. Many
seals and sealings {the impression of seals on
clay) were found in this storehouse.

 

202021

A dockyard at Lothal
This huge tank may have
been 2 dockyard, where
boats and ships came in
from the sea and through
the river channel. Goode
were probably loaded
and unloaded here,A building that was found here was probably a
workshop for making beads: pieces of stone, half
made beads, tools for bead making, and finished
beads have all been found here.

 

 

= 32
(ouR Pasts-1

The mystery.of the end

Around 3900 years’ago we find the beginning of
a major change. People stopped living in many of
the cities. Writing, seals and weights were no
longer used. Raw materials brought from long
distances became rare. In Mohenjodaro, we find
that garbage piled up on the streets, the drainage
system broke down, and new, less impressive
houses were built, even over the streets.

‘Why did all this happen? We are not sure. Some
scholars suggest that the rivers dried up. Others
suggest that there was deforestation. This could
have happened because fuel was required for
baking bricks, and for smelting copper ores.
Besides, grazing by large herds of cattle, sheep
and goat may have destroyed the green cover. In
some areas there were floods. But none of these
reasons can explain the end of all the cities.
Flooding, or a river drying up would have had an
effect in only some areas.

m2021It appears as if the rulers lost control. In any
case, the effects of the change are quite clear.
Sites in Sind and west Punjab (present-day
Pakistan) were abandoned, while many people
moved into newer, smaller settlements to the east
and the south.

New cities emerged about 1400 years later. You
will read about them in Chapters 5 and 8.

Elsewhere

Find Egypt in your atlas. Most of Egypt is a dry desert, except for the
lands along the river Nile
Around 5000 years ago, kings ruled over Egypt. Thes¢ kings sent armies
todistant lands to get
gold, silver. ivory,
timber, and precious
stones. They also
built huge tombs,
known as pyramids.
When they died,
the bodies of kings
were preserved and
buried in these
pyramids. These
carefully preserved.
bodies are known as.
‘mummies’. A large number of objects were also buried with them, These
included food and drink, clothes, ornaments, utensils, musical instruments,
weapons and animals, Sometimes even serving men and women were buried
with the rulers. These are amongst the most elaborate burials known in
5 world history.
Do you think kings would have needed these things after death?

 

Imagine

You are travelling with your parents, about 4000 years
ago. from Lothal to Mohenjodaro. Describe how you
would travel, what your parents might carry with them,
and what you would see in Mohenjodaro.

338eer aN

1. How do archaeologists know that cloth was used in
the Harappan civilisation?

2, Match the columns

Copper Gujarat
Gold Afghanistan
Tin Rajasthan
Precious stones, Karnataka

3. Why were metals, writing, the wheel,&nd the plough,
important for the gerne

   
 
  

Which
oe with the most?

5. Makea lstOfthat the Harappans ate, and put a tick
mark agaiyst the things you eat today.

led food to the Harappan cities was different from.
fat of the farmers and herders you read about in
‘Qchapter 2? Give reasons for your answer.

wan (|

7. Describe three important buildings in your city or
village. Are they located in a special part of the
settlement (e.g. the centre}? What are the activities
that take place in these buildings?

6. re ‘think that the life of farmers and herders who

8. Are there any old buildings in your locality? Find out

aot how old they are and who looks after them.

(ouR Pasts-1

m2021Sanskrit and other languages
Sanskrit is part of a family of languages known as Indo-European.
‘Some Indian languages such as Assamese, Gujarat, Hindi, Kashmiri
and Sindhi; Asian languages such as Persian and many European
languages such as English, French, German, Greek, Italian and
‘Spanish belong to this family. They are called a family because they
originally had words in common.

Take the words ‘matr’ (Sanskrit), ‘ma’ (Hindi) and ‘mother’ (English).

Do you notice any similarities?

Other languages used in the subcontinent belong to different
families. For instance, those used in the north-east belong to the
‘Tibeto-Burman family; Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Malayalam belong
to the Dravidian family; and the languages spoken in Jharkhand and
parts of central India belong to the Austro-Asiatic family:

List the languages you have heard about and try(and identify the
families to which they belong.

The books we use are written and printed. The
Rigveda was recited and heard rather than read.
It was written down several centuries after it was
first composed, and printed less than 200 years
ago.

How. historians study the Rigveda

Historians, like archaeologists, find out about the
past, but, in addition to material remains, they
examine written sources as well. Let us see how
they study the Rigveda.

Some of the hymns in the Rigveda are in the
form of dialogues. This is part of one such hymn,
a dialogue between a sage named Vishvamitra,
and two rivers, (Beas and Sutlej) that were
worshipped as goddesses.

Find the rivers on Map 1 (page 2), then read on:

= 36A page from a
‘manuscript of the
Rigveds,

“This manuscript of the
Rigveda, on birch bark,
\was found in Kashi
About 150 years ago, it
was used to prepare one
fof the earliest printed
texts of the Rigveda, as
well as an English
translation. It is now
preserved in a library in
Pune, Maharashtra

 

Vishvamitra andes GS
‘Vishvamitra: O rivers, cone down tome DE ‘two swift horses, like

   

the path the gods have made
ed. Why do you pray to us, 0
sage?

Vishvamitra: O sisters, please listen to me, the singer who has come from a
distance with his chariots and carts, Let your waters not rise above our axles, $0
that we can cross safely.

‘The rivers: We will listen to your prayers so that you can cross safely.

Historians point out that this hymn was composed in the area where
these rivers flow. They, also suggest that the sage lived in a society where
horses and cows were Valued animals. That is why the rivers are compared
to horses and cows.

Doyou think chariots were also important? Give reasons for your answer.
Read the verses and find out what are the modes of transport that are
mentioned,

Other rivers, especially the Indus and its other tributaries, and the
Sarasvati, are also named in the hymns. The Ganga and Yamuna are
named only once.

Look at Map 1 (page 2) and list 5 rivers that are not mentioned in the
Rigveda.

 

378

WHAT BOOKS AND
BURIALS TELL US.

m2021= 38

Cattle, horses and chariots

‘There are many prayers in the Rigveda for cattle,
children (especially sons), and horses. Horses
were yoked to chariots that were used in battles,
which were fought to capture cattle, Battles were
also fought for land, which was important for
pasture, and for growing hardy crops that ripened
quickly, such as barley. Some battles were fought
for water, and to capture people.

‘Some of the wealth that was obtained was kept
by the leaders, some was given to the priests and
the rest was distributed amongst the people. Some
wealth was used for the performance of yajnas or
sacrifices in which offerings were made into the
fire. These were meant for gods and goddesses.
Offerings could include ghee, grain, and in some
cases, animals.

Most men took part in these wars. There was,
no regulararmy, but there were assemblies where
people met and discussed matters of war and
peace. They also chose leaders, who were often
brave and. skilful warriors.

Words.to)describe people

‘There are several ways of describing people — in
terms of the work they do, the language they
speak, the place they belong to, their family, their
communities and cultural practices. Let us see
some of the words used to describe people found
in the Rigveda.

‘There are two groups who are described in
terms of their work — the priests, sometimes
called brahmins, who performed various rituals,
and the rajas.

‘These rajas were not like the ones you will be
learning about later. They did not have capital
cities, palaces or armies, nor did they collect taxes.Generally, sons did not automatically succeed
fathers as rajas.

Read the previous section once more and see
whether you can find out what the rajas did,

Two words were used to describe the people or
the community as a whole. One was the word
jana, which we still use in Hindi and other
languages. The other was vish. The word vaishya
comes from vish. You will learn more about this
in Chapter 5,

Several vish or jana are mentioned by name.
So we find reference to the Puru jana or vish, the
Bharata jana or vish, the Yadu jana or vish, and
so on.

Do any of these names sound familiar?

Sometimes, the people who composed the
hymns described themselves as Aryas.and called
their opponents Dasas or Dasyus. These were
people who did not perform sacrifices, and
probably spoke different languages, Later, the
term dasa (and the feminine das came to mean
slave. Slaves were women and men who were often
captured in war. They were treated as the property
of their owners, who could make them do
whatever work they wanted.

While the Rigveda was being composed in the
north-west of the subcontinent, there were other
developments elsewhere. Let us look at some of
these,

Silent sentinels—the story of the megaliths

Look at the illustration on the next page.

These stone boulders are known as megaliths
(literally big stones). These were carefully arranged
by people, and were used to mark burial sites. The
practice of erecting megaliths began about
3000 years ago, and was prevalent throughout
the Deccan, south India, in the north-east and
Kashmir.

398Top : This type of
rmegalith is known as a
cist. Some cits, lke the
fone showin here, have
Portholes which could
be used as an entrance.

Fe

 

Some important megalithic
sites are shown on Map 2
(page13). While some
megaliths can be seen on the
surface, other megalithic
burials are often underground.

Sometimes, archaeologists
find a circle of stone boulders
or a single large stone
standing on the ground
‘These are the only indications
that there are burials beneath.

There were several things
that people did to make megaliths.. We have made
a list here. Try and arrange them in the correct
order: digging pits im the earth, transporting
stones, breaking ‘boulders, placing stones in
position, finding, stitablé stone, shaping stones,
burying the dead.

All these burials have some common features.
Generally, the dead were buried with distinctive
pots, which are called Black and Red Ware. Also
found are tools and weapons of iron and
sometimes, skeletons of horses, horse equipment
and ornaments of stone and gold.

Was iron used in the Harappan cities?

Iron equipment found from megalithic burials,
Left top : Horse equipment.

Left below : Axes.

Below : A dagger.Finding out about social differences

Archaeologists think that objects found with a
skeleton probably belonged to the dead person.
Sometimes, more objects are found in one grave
than in another. Find Brahmagiri on Map 2
(page 13). Here, one skeleton was buried with 33
gold beads, 2 stone beads, 4 copper bangles, and
one conch shell. Other skeletons have only a few
pots. These finds suggest that there was some
difference in status amongst the people who were
buried. Some were rich, others poor, some chiefs,
others followers.

Were some burial spots meant for certain
families?

Sometimes, megaliths contain more than\one
skeleton. These indicate that people, perhaps
belonging to the same family, were buried in the
same place though not at the same time, The bodies
of those who died later were brought into the grave
through the portholes. Stone circles or boulders
placed on the surface probably served as signposts
to find the burial site, so that people could return
to the same place whenever they wanted to.

A special burial at namgaon

Find Inamgaon on Map 2 (page13). It is a site on
the river Ghod, a tributary of the Bhima. It was
occupied between 3600 and 2700 years ago. Here,
adults were generally buried in the ground, laid
out straight, with the head towards the north.
Sometimes burials were within the houses.
Vessels that probably contained food and water
were placed with the dead.

One man was found buried in a large, four
legged clay jar in the courtyard of a five-roomed
house (one of the largest houses at the site), in

4sthe centre of the settlement. This house also
had a granary. The body was placed in a cross-
legged position.

Do you think this was the body of a chief?
Give reasons for your answer.

What skeletal studies tell us

Itis easy to make out the skeleton of a child from its small size, However,
there are no major differences in the bones of a girl and a boy.

Can we make out whether a skeleton was that of a man or a
woman?


‘Sometimes, people decide on the basis of what is found with the
skeleton. For instance, if a skeleton is found with jewellery. it is
sometimes thought to be that of a woman. However.-there are
problems with this. Often, men also wore ornaments.

A better way of figuring out the sex-of a skeleton is to look at the
bone structure. The hip or the pelvie area of women is generally
larger to enable child bearing.

‘These distinctions are based on)tfiodern Skeletal studies.

About 2000 years ago, theré-was a(famous physician named
Charaka who wrote a book on medi¢iné known as the Charaka
Samhita. There he states that the human body has 360 bones. This
is a much larger number than the 200 bones that are recognised in
modern anatomy. Charaka artived at this figure by counting the
teeth, joints and cartilage.

How do you think he found out about the human body in such
great detail?

Occupations at Inamgaon

Archaeologists have found seeds of wheat, barley,
rice, pulses, millets, peas and sesame. Bones of a
number of animals, many bearing cut marks that
show they may have been used as food, have also
been found. These include cattle, buffalo, goat,
sheep, dog, horse, ass, pig, sambhar, spotted deer,
blackbuck, antelope, hare, and mongoose, besides
birds, crocodile, turtle, crab and fish. There is

wag evidence that fruits such as ber, amla, jamun, dates

cuemsis, and a variety of berries were collectedUse this evidence to list the possible
occupations of the people at Inamgaon.

Elsewhere

Find China in your atlas. Around 3500 years ago,
we find some of the first evidence of writing in China,

‘These writings were on animal bones. These are
called oracle bones, because they were used to
predict the future. Kings got scribes to write
questions on the bones — would they win battles?
Would the harvest be good? Would they have sons?
‘The bones were then put into the fire, and they
cracked because of the heat. Then fortunetellers
studied these cracks, and tried to predict the future.
As you may expect, they sometimes made mistakes.

‘These kings lived in palaces in cities. They
amassed vast quantities of wealth, including large,
elaborately decorated bronze vessels. However, they
did not know the use of iron,

List one difference between the raja ofthe Rigveda
and these kings.

 

Imagine

You live in Inamgaon, 3000 years ago, and the chief
has died last night. Today. your parents are preparing
for the burial. Describe the scene, including how food
is being prepared for thie funeral. What do you think
would be offered?

 

m2021eer aN

1. Match the columns

Sukta ‘Stone boulder
Chariots Sacrifice
Yajna Well-said
Dasa Used in battles
‘Megalith Slave

2. Complete the sentences: >

fa) Slaves were Ke
0) mente psi os.
(6) Stone cites 8 DouldePaom the surface were
Ser E RS

re wapaTor

(a) Ports of
te Pepe ng ate

 

3. ways are the books we read today different
the Rigveda?

4 What kind of evidence from burials do archaeologists
use to find out whether there were social differences
‘amongst those who were buried?

5. In what ways do you think that the life of a raja was
different from that of a dasa or dast?

=4a
(ouR PasTs-1

m2021Let’s do

 

 

 

 

Find out whether your school library has a collection,
of books on religion, and list the names of five books
from this collection,

 

Write down a short poem or song that you have
memorised. Did you hear or read the poem or song?
How did you learn it by heart?

 

In the Rigveda, people were described in terms of the
work they did and the languages they spoke. In the
table below, fill in the names of six people you know,
choosing three men and three women. For each of
them, mention the work they do and the language
they speak. Would you like to add anything else. to,
the description?

 

 

NAME WORK VANGUAGE

ANYTHING ELSE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

202021

450

‘WHAT BOOKS AND
